Runtime API restructure (#10062)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/routing-reference.mdx

Reviewer: Maybe this page would also be the place to document `export const prerender`? I guess that’s kind of a “routing” concern?

:::

:::caution
The `getStaticPaths()` function executes in its own isolated scope once, before any page loads. Therefore you can't reference anything from its parent scope, other than file imports. The compiler will warn you if you break this requirement.
:::

### `params`

The `params` key of every returned object tells Astro what routes to build. The returned `params` must map back to the dynamic parameters and rest parameters defined in your component filepath.
`params` are encoded into the URL, so only strings are supported as values. The value for each `params` object must match the parameters used in the page name.

For example, suppose that you have a page at `src/pages/posts/[id].astro`. If you export `getStaticPaths` from this page and return the following for paths:

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  return [
    { params: { id: '1' } },
    { params: { id: '2' } },
    { params: { id: '3' } }
  ];
}

const { id } = Astro.params;
---
<h1>{id}</h1>
```

Then Astro will statically generate `posts/1`, `posts/2`, and `posts/3` at build time.

### Data Passing with `props`

> To pass additional data to each generated page, you can also set a `props` value on every returned path object. Unlike `params`, `props` are not encoded into the URL and so aren't limited to only strings.

Reviewer: This would align this with my `params` suggestion above:

```suggestion
To pass additional data to each generated page, you can set a `props` value on each object in the array returned by `getStaticPaths()`. Unlike `params`, `props` are not encoded into the URL and so aren't limited to only strings.
```

> For example, if you generate pages based from data fetched from a remote API, you can pass the full data object to the page component inside of `getStaticPaths`:

Reviewer: Nits:

```suggestion
For example, if you generate pages with data fetched from a remote API, you can pass the full data object to the page component inside of `getStaticPaths()`:
```

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const data = await fetch('...').then(response => response.json());

  return data.map((post) => {
    return {
      params: { id: post.id },
      props: { post },
    };
  });
}

const { id } = Astro.params;
const { post } = Astro.props;
---
<h1>{id}: {post.name}</h1>
```

> You can also pass a regular array, which may be helpful when generating or stubbing a known list of routes.
> 
> ```astro
> ---
> export async function getStaticPaths() {
>   const posts = [
>     {id: '1', category: "astro", title: "API Reference"},
>     {id: '2', category: "react", title: "Creating a React Counter!"}
>   ];
>   return posts.map((post) => {
>     return {
>       params: { id: post.id },
>       props: { post }
>     };
>   });
> }
> const {id} = Astro.params;
> const {post} = Astro.props;
> ---
> <body>
>   <h1>{id}: {post.title}</h1>
>   <h2>Category: {post.category}</h2>
> </body>
> ```
> 
> Then Astro will statically generate `posts/1` and `posts/2` at build time using the page component in `pages/posts/[id].astro`. The page can reference this data using `Astro.props`:

Reviewer: Maybe this whole second chunk can be deleted? It feels like it’s not adding anything?
```suggestion
```

Author: Done!

---
title: Routing Reference
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 4
---
import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';

There is no separate routing configuration in Astro. Every [supported page file](/en/basics/astro-pages/#supported-page-files) located within the special `src/pages/` directory creates a single page route, or multiple page routes dynamically when the file name contains a [parameter](#params).

## `getStaticPaths()`

**Type:** `(options: GetStaticPathsOptions) => Promise<GetStaticPathsResult> | GetStaticPathsResult`

> If a page uses dynamic params in the filename, that component will need to export a `getStaticPaths()` function.

Reviewer 2: I think the right thing would be to spell the full word (parameters) or then reference the property with code syntax, right?
```suggestion
If a page uses dynamic parameters in the filename, that component will need to export a `getStaticPaths()` function.
```

```suggestion
If a page uses dynamic `params` in the filename, that component will need to export a `getStaticPaths()` function.
```

> This function is required because Astro is a static site builder. That means that your entire site is built ahead of time. If Astro doesn't know to generate a page at build time, your users won't see it when they visit your site.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This function is required because Astro is a static site builder. That means that your entire site is built ahead of time. If Astro doesn't know how to generate a page at build time, your users won't see it when they visit your site.
```

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  return [
    { params: { /* required */ }, props: { /* optional */ } },
    { params: { ... } },
    { params: { ... } },
    // ...
  ];
}
---
<!-- Your HTML template here. -->
```

The `getStaticPaths()` function should return an array of objects to determine which paths will be pre-rendered by Astro.

It can also be used in static file endpoints for [dynamic routing](/en/guides/endpoints/#params-and-dynamic-routing).

:::tip
When using TypeScript, use the [`GetStaticPaths`](/en/guides/typescript/#infer-getstaticpaths-types) type utility to ensure type-safe access of your `params` and `props`.
:::

:::caution

> The `getStaticPaths()` function executes in its own isolated scope once, before any page loads. Therefore you can't reference anything from its parent scope, other than file imports. The compiler will warn if you break this requirement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `getStaticPaths()` function executes in its own isolated scope once, before any page loads. Therefore you can't reference anything from its parent scope, other than file imports. The compiler will warn you if you break this requirement.
```

:::

### `params`

> The `params` key of every returned object tells Astro what routes to build. The returned params must map back to the dynamic parameters and rest parameters defined in your component filepath.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `params` key of every returned object tells Astro what routes to build. The returned `params` must map back to the dynamic parameters and rest parameters defined in your component filepath.
```

`params` are encoded into the URL, so only strings are supported as values. The value for each `params` object must match the parameters used in the page name.

For example, suppose that you have a page at `src/pages/posts/[id].astro`. If you export `getStaticPaths` from this page and return the following for paths:

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  return [
    { params: { id: '1' } },
    { params: { id: '2' } },
    { params: { id: '3' } }
  ];
}

const { id } = Astro.params;
---
<h1>{id}</h1>
```

Then Astro will statically generate `posts/1`, `posts/2`, and `posts/3` at build time.

### Data Passing with `props`

To pass additional data to each generated page, you can also set a `props` value on every returned path object. Unlike `params`, `props` are not encoded into the URL and so aren't limited to only strings.

> For example, suppose that you generate pages based off of data fetched from a remote API. You can pass the full data object to the page component inside of `getStaticPaths`:

Reviewer 2: I think "based on" might be simpler?
```suggestion
For example, suppose that you generate pages based on data fetched from a remote API. You can pass the full data object to the page component inside of `getStaticPaths`:
```

Author: Agreed it's from. And it's not "suppose that" :smile:

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const data = await fetch('...').then(response => response.json());

  return data.map((post) => {
    return {
      params: { id: post.id },
      props: { post },
    };
  });
}

const { id } = Astro.params;
const { post } = Astro.props;
---
<h1>{id}: {post.name}</h1>
```

You can also pass a regular array, which may be helpful when generating or stubbing a known list of routes.

```astro
---
export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const posts = [
    {id: '1', category: "astro", title: "API Reference"},
    {id: '2', category: "react", title: "Creating a React Counter!"}
  ];
  return posts.map((post) => {
    return {
      params: { id: post.id },
      props: { post }
    };
  });
}
const {id} = Astro.params;
const {post} = Astro.props;
---
<body>
  <h1>{id}: {post.title}</h1>
  <h2>Category: {post.category}</h2>
</body>
```

Then Astro will statically generate `posts/1` and `posts/2` at build time using the page component in `pages/posts/[id].astro`. The page can reference this data using `Astro.props`:

### `paginate()`

> Pagination is a common use-case for websites that Astro natively supports via the `paginate()` function. `paginate()` will automatically generate the array to return from `getStaticPaths()` that creates one URL for every page of the paginated collection. The page number will be passed as a param, and the page data will be passed as a `page` prop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pagination is a common use-case for websites that Astro natively supports via the `paginate()` function. `paginate()` will automatically generate the array to return from `getStaticPaths()` that creates one URL for every page of the paginated collection. The page number will be passed as a `param`, and the page data will be passed as a `page` prop.
```

- `options` - Optional object with the following properties:
  - `pageSize` - The number of items shown per page (`10` by default)
  - `params` - Send additional parameters for creating dynamic routes
  - `props` - Send additional props to be available on each page

`paginate()` assumes a file name of `[page].astro` or `[...page].astro`. The `page` param becomes the page number in your URL:

- `/posts/[page].astro` would generate the URLs `/posts/1`, `/posts/2`, `/posts/3`, etc.
- `/posts/[...page].astro` would generate the URLs `/posts`, `/posts/2`, `/posts/3`, etc.

#### The pagination `page` prop

<p>

**Type:** `Page<TData>`
</p>

Pagination will pass a `page` prop to every rendered page that represents a single page of data in the paginated collection. This includes the data that you've paginated (`page.data`) as well as metadata for the page (`page.url`, `page.start`, `page.end`, `page.total`, etc). This metadata is useful for things like a "Next Page" button or a "Showing 1-10 of 100" message.

##### `page.data`

<p>

**Type:** `Array<TData>`
</p>

Array of data returned from the `paginate()` function for the current page.

##### `page.start`

<p>

**Type:** `number`
</p>

> Index of first item on current page, starting at `0`. (e.g. if `pageSize: 25`, this would be `0` on page 1, `25` on page 2, etc.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Index of the first item on the current page, starting at `0`. (e.g. if `pageSize: 25`, this would be `0` on page 1, `25` on page 2, etc.)
```

##### `page.end`

<p>

**Type:** `number`
</p>

> Index of last item on current page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Index of the last item on the current page.
```

##### `page.size`

<p>

**Type:** `number`<br />
**Default:** `10`
</p>

> How many items per-page.

Reviewer 2: This sounds more like a question, maybe rewording a bit does the trick? Also, makes it more consistent with `page.total`
```suggestion
The total number of items per page.
```

---
title: Routing Reference
i18nReady: true
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 4
---
import Since from '~/components/Since.astro';
import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';

There is no separate routing configuration in Astro.

Every [supported page file](/en/basics/astro-pages/#supported-page-files) located within the special `src/pages/` directory creates a route. When the file name contains a [parameter](#params), a route can create multiple pages dynamically, otherwise it creates a single page.

By default, all Astro page routes and endpoints are generated and prerendered at build time. [On-demand server rendering](/en/guides/on-demand-rendering/) can be set for individual routes, or as the default.

## `prerender`

<p>

**Type:** `boolean`<br />

> **Default:** `true` <br />

Reviewer 3: I already approved, but with Chris suggestions (🙌🏽 ) the content has changed a bit. Everything looks fine with a quick read (I didn't check for typo), but I'm a bit concern about this `Default:`.

Both `Per-page override` and `Switch to server mode` are under this `h2`. And while `true` is the default in static mode, this is not the case (from my understanding) with `server` mode. So it could be confusing.
I think we should either move `Default:` into subsections or use a slightly more complex `Default:`. Perhaps something like:
```suggestion
**Default:** `true` with `output: 'static'` or `false` with `output: 'server'` <br />
```

Author: Thanks for commenting on this! I had wondered about this, because you're right, it's not the default in `server` mode. It *is* true that it's default **until you do something to change the nature of your project**, which is how the text was handling it. I wasn't sure whether we had a standard way of either/or 'ing it, or whether it was in fact actually helpful to present the default as `true` (because it is until something else happens.)

Reviewer 3: I was hesitant about that. I understood the intention given the structure of the page, but I am now quite familiar with how it works (I think 😄 ). So I totally understand what you mean.
But for someone new it might be less obvious... especially if they quickly scan the page instead of reading the explanations in detail...
(When I see some questions asked, sometimes I just want to say "but have you read the doc"!? I admire your patience! 🙄) So I don't know what the best way to solve this is, but I think it could be problematic.

Regarding the standard way of doing it, I don't think so. But I'm sure there is another place where `Default:` is used as I suggested (two possible values, not the wording). But I can't find the page anymore... I don't think it's been edited, maybe moved. Or I'm not looking in the right place.

Author: I had thought we had another place too, but I didn't immediately find it and didn't want to introduce inconsistency! If you can't find it either, maybe it didn't make it into the new docs!

I'm happy to go with your suggestion if you feel it's more helpful!

Reviewer 3: Ok, so I only just saw your comment now... (thanks the email notifications...) I was on the page, but it seems I'm having auto-refresh issues with Github the last few days (notifs in particular). Even after posting the link, your comment wasn't displayed... 

> I'm happy to go with your suggestion if you feel it's more helpful! My only slight nagging concern is that `output: 'static'` is a default that no one would set. And, it's def true by default default, even if they don't know what `output: 'static'` is. Like, this is _really_ the default. And I _do_ think there's value in it being presented that way.

Yeah, I understand your concern and honestly I don't have a perfect solution. Considering the way the content is presented, I would say it is fine the way it is. But then I think that some people read the doc too quickly and they risk stopping at the word in bold (`Default:`) without reading the rest and that could cause confusion.

So I thought I'd just mention it just in case. Now, especially since we're not sure what's best, I also agree to leave it as is, and if it's a problem, we'll update later.

Author: Thank you for the conversation! I'm leaning towards leaving it like this and then waiting to see whether it causes confusion or more people mention it. It can always be changed!

I think part of why I have this opinion is the reason behind making the old hybrid behaviour the default is because too many people were simply enabling `output: 'server'` just to have ANY on-demand rendering features, even when they only needed it on one page. We're also trying to position the docs to nudge towards the behaviour of thinking of your site as prerendered, opting in per-route when you need it, and only when and if you realize you *really* need it, switching to `server` mode. I do think this framing helps that story as well!

```astro title="src/pages/blog/[post].astro" "post"
---
// In 'server' mode, opt in to prerendering:
// export const prerender = true

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  return [
    // { params: { /* required */ }, props: { /* optional */ } },
    { params: { post: '1' } }, // [post] is the parameter
    { params: { post: '2' } }, // must match the file name
    // ...
  ];
}
---
<!-- Your HTML template here. -->
```

`getStaticPaths()` can also be used in static file endpoints for [dynamic routing](/en/guides/endpoints/#params-and-dynamic-routing).

:::tip
When using TypeScript, use the [`GetStaticPaths`](/en/guides/typescript/#infer-getstaticpaths-types) type utility to ensure type-safe access of your `params` and `props`.
:::

:::caution
The `getStaticPaths()` function executes in its own isolated scope once, before any page loads. Therefore you can't reference anything from its parent scope, other than file imports. The compiler will warn you if you break this requirement.
:::

### `params`

The `params` key of each object in the array returned by `getStaticPaths()` tells Astro what routes to build.

> The keys in `params` must match the parameters defined in your component filepath. The value for each `params` object must match the parameters used in the page name. `params` are encoded into the URL, so only strings are supported as values.

Reviewer: “filepath” or “file path”? I get red squigglies for “filepath” 😄 

```suggestion
The keys in `params` must match the parameters defined in your component file path. The value for each `params` object must match the parameters used in the page name. `params` are encoded into the URL, so only strings are supported as values.
```
